What is IAM?

IAM (Identity and Access Management) is a service in AWS that helps you securely manage users, groups, and permissions to control access to AWS resources.

Why should I use IAM?

You should use IAM to:

Control Access: Grant or restrict permissions to AWS services and resources.
Enhance Security: Follow the principle of least privilege by giving only necessary permissions.
Manage Users & Roles: Create users, roles, and policies for better security and organization.
Enable Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA): Add an extra layer of security.

When do I use IAM?

You should use IAM whenever:

You need to allow multiple users or applications to access AWS resources securely.
You want to apply security best practices (e.g., role-based access control).
You are working with third-party services that need limited AWS access.

How do I manage IAM?

Users & Groups: Create and manage users or group them together for easier permission management.
Roles: Assign permissions to AWS services or third-party applications without using credentials.
Policies: Define JSON-based permissions that specify what actions are allowed or denied.
MFA & Access Keys: Secure accounts with MFA and use temporary credentials where possible.

How IAM works?
IAM works by using policies that define who (users, roles, services) can access what (AWS resources) and how (read, write, delete). AWS evaluates these policies before granting access to resources.

Practical Example of AWS IAM

Scenario: Secure Access to an S3 Bucket Using IAM
Imagine you are a DevSecOps Engineer managing AWS resources for your company. You have a developer named John, who needs to upload files to an S3 bucket but should not be able to delete files.

Step 1: Create an IAM User for John

Go to AWS IAM Console → Users → Add User
Enter John as the username
Select Programmatic access (so John can use AWS CLI)

Step 2: Create a Policy with Limited S3 Access
AWS IAM policies use JSON to define permissions. Below is a policy that:
✅ Allows uploading files to the S3 bucket
❌ Denies file deletion

IAM Policy (JSON Format)
json
Copy
Edit
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": ["s3:PutObject"],
            "Resource": "arn:aws:s3:::my-secure-bucket/*"
        },
        {
            "Effect": "Deny",
            "Action": ["s3:DeleteObject"],
            "Resource": "arn:aws:s3:::my-secure-bucket/*"
        }
    ]
}
Replace "my-secure-bucket" with your actual S3 bucket name.

Step 3: Attach the Policy to John’s User Account

Go to AWS IAM Console → Users
Select John → Permissions
Attach the newly created policy

Step 4: John Tests His Access
If John tries to upload a file, it will work ✅
If John tries to delete a file, it will fail ❌

Conclusion
IAM ensures least privilege access (John can upload but not delete).
Fine-grained control over AWS resources.
Better security by restricting unnecessary actions.
